"Now that you have your application
running as a service,
let us now look
at the tools for managing services
working with SYSTEMD targets,
logging, and getting information
about the overall state of the system,"
says Dave.
He continues the session.
The two major tools we will see
are the systemctl
and journalctl.
Systemctl is the main command
used to manage services
on a SYSTEMD-managed server.
It can be used to manage services
such as start,
restart, stop,
or reload a service,
as well as enable or disable services
to start during the system boot.
It is also used to view information about
and manage the system state.
We saw this in action
in the core concepts section
where we listed the default target
or run level for the system
and then changed it to a different target.
Another useful tool we will explore
in this section is the journalctl tool.
This command can query the contents
of the SYSTEMD logging system called journal
and is a convenient troubleshooting tool
to figure out issues
such as service failures.
We will start with systemctl first.
To show some of the commonly used commands,
we will make use of Docker
as an example service.
To start a service,
use the systemctl start command.
Similarly, to stop,
use the systemctl stop command.
To restart the service,
use the systemctl restart command.
This will attempt to bring down the service
and then bring it back up.
If you wish to reload the service
without interrupting normal functionality,
use the systemctl reload command.
To enable a service
and make it persistent across reboot,
use the systemctl enable command.
Should you wish to disable the service
at boot,
use the systemctl disable command.
The systemctl status command
provides information
about the state of the service.
If running properly,
it should show a state of active running.
Besides the active running state,
there are a few other states
that you should be aware of.
If the service has been stopped,
it should be in the inactive (dead) state.
There are transient states
called activating and deactivating,
which are in-between two states.
Finally, there is the failed state.
An example of this state
is when the command run
by the service itself fails for some reason.
Another useful command
is the systemctl daemon-reload command.
Running this command
after making changes to a service unit file
reloads the system manager configuration
and makes the SYSTEMD aware of the changes.
A running service
whose unit file has been updated on disk
can only be restarted after running
the systemctl daemon-reload command.
You can also make changes to unit files
using the systemctl edit command.
To make changes
to the newly created project-mercury service,
use the command
systemctl edit project-mercury.service
with the —full flag.
This will open
the service configuration file
with a text editor.
You can make the changes,
rewrite the settings as needed.
Units edited this way
apply the changes immediately
without having to run the daemon-reload.
In the core concepts section,
we saw how to view
and change the default target for the system.
We used systemctl get default
to see the current runlevel or the target.
We used the set-default command
to change it to a different target.
Besides these,
systemctl also provides
a good deal of information about the system.
For example,
to list all the units SYSTEMD has loaded
or attempted to load,
use the systemctl list-units command
with the —all option.
This prints all units that are active,
inactive,
failed, or in other transient states.
The example here
shows just a snippet of the result
and just shows the target.
The actual command output
provides much more detail
than what is shown here.
If you only want to see information
about the active units,
run the same command without the —all flag.
The journalctl is useful
when troubleshooting issues
with SYSTEMD units
as it checks the journal
or log entries from all parts of the system.
Journalctl without any flags
prints all the log entries
from the oldest entry to the newest.
To see the logs from the current boot,
run it with the —B option.
To see the log entries for a specific unit,
such as the Docker.service,
run it with the —U flag
with the name of the unit as the argument.
The data provided
by the log entries for a service file
generally provide the reason why
a service unit is in an inactive
or failed state.
This is great for debugging issues
with the config files
or issues with the service dependencies,
et cetera.
With that,
Dave ended his session.
Bob now has a working service
for project-mercury running on his laptop.
Now, head over to the hands-on lab
to create a SYSTEMD service
and practice working with SYSTEMD commands.